Dave's a ruling. Okay. First of all, I wanted to ask the obvious question. I
haven't found too much biographical about you yet, and I wondered how you got
involved with science fiction as a youngster. Did you start reading it as an
adolescent and work your way up through the fan structure or something? I read
it from the time I was about 13 or 14 years old, but where I was living, the
idea of fandom was unknown at the time. I was raised in East Yorkshire in
England, and so far as I knew, for a long time, in fact, until I went off to
university, I was the only person I knew who read science fiction. And then when
I got to the university, I found it was not all that uncommon, but at least
until I was 18, it was a private activity, and there was no organized effort.
There were no groups of people discussing it. There were no conventions or
anything like that. It was a solitary reading activity. And I got into it simply
because I was interested in science, and it was the only type of writing, apart
from science fact, that appealed to someone interested in science. There wasn't
much of it around, of course. The period I'm talking about, there were no
English magazines that I recall, and about the only things that came over from
the United States were astounding, which then became analog, and galaxy, and
occasionally amazing stories and fantastic stories. And that was about it. And
so you were never really involved in any kind of fan structure then? Not in
England. In fact, not until after I had begun to publish stories in this
country. I was never involved in any fan activities until 1977,
which was here in Washington, when I went to Disclave and found out there was a
whole new world of fan activities out there. Could you just briefly tell me how
you got your first story published? Was it a long series of rejection slips, or
did you hit it right away? It was a reasonably long one. I can't say that I had
an endless string of rejections. I started to write in 76, and didn't have any
previous background of trying to write fiction of any kind. So I wasn't too
discouraged, because I realized in my first story or two that I was evolving
rapidly. In other words, I could reread things of a few months before and say,
my Lord, no wonder nobody would buy that. But I probably had 20 rejections in
total before I sold anything, and I went on getting rejections after that with
some degree of regularity, and still do. But I've become used to it. When I
first wrote, if it hadn't been for the fact that a few months later I could
myself see what was going wrong, I might have been discouraged by rejections.
But as it was, I could sympathize with the editors having to read the stuff I'd
sent them. And I was not at all sure when I began what style of science fiction
I would want to write. I don't know if that makes sense as a statement, but I
now consider that there are a number of different styles verging from the very
literary and totally unscientific to the very scientific and quasi-illiterate.
And usually people write for a particular audience, and I was threshing around
at the time, and I wasn't quite sure what I was writing, which is another reason
that I think I sympathized with the editors. I find it amazing that you didn't
start writing until 76, because I'm an English teacher and very sensitive to
style and so forth, because I teach literature. And my goodness, I just can't
believe that you... I mean, it's almost like you started publishing first-class
science fiction with your first book. Well, thank you for the compliment. I
don't say I hadn't written anything at all, but I hadn't written fiction. I had
written a lot of nonfiction, a lot of technical reports, but I had never
attempted a fictional form until 76. But I was always critical of the way
reports were written when I was writing nonfiction. I felt that people didn't
try to make them interesting or clear, and perhaps that was an apprenticeship
which helped me when I came to write fiction. But I don't know. It's hard to
evaluate what you write yourself. Yeah, it is. I know that. Before I get down to
some questions about your work, I was curious about the Earth Satellite
Corporation. Are you still the vice president for research and development? Yes,
that's right. Could you tell me a little bit about what the corporation does?
Yes, what we do is we take information from satellites that look at the Earth as
opposed to looking out in space somewhere, and we use that information in
looking for natural resources on the Earth and in measuring them and monitoring
them. So, for instance, we have exploration programs in which we look for oil
and gas and minerals around the world. We have other projects in which we
analyze the condition of surface water or of land use. We're just finishing a
big project in the state of Pennsylvania looking at their abandoned mine lands
to see what condition they're in. And that's done sometimes from aerial
observations in aircraft, but mostly we use satellite data. And the company is
now approaching 13 years old and, in a sense, was started too soon. I was there
at the beginning, but our first few years were very difficult because we found
that we were in a field in which almost no one knew what we were doing. And we
would spend lots of our time trying to explain to people the potential that we
believed we could see in the field. Well, now enough people have seen examples
of it that we find it much easier. So things have become much smoother for the
company in the last few years. Okay, if we have time a little later or as I ask
you questions about your work, I probably can work some more of that satellite
thing in because I am curious about that. But I want to make sure we had time to
get down to some things about your own novels. I've done non-fiction books on
that subject, or maybe you don't. Well, let's see. Is Earthwatch one of those?
Yeah, Earthwatch is the only one at the moment, but I'm now working on the
manuscript for a book called Man on Earth, which will again be looking at the
Earth with satellite images. And it's very similar to Earthwatch, except it will
concentrate more on the works of man and how man is visible by his activities. I
should say man and woman, I suppose. How our actions become visible on the Earth
and what they look like. Yeah, I knew you'd written that book, Earthwatch, but I
have to confess, I just haven't been able to find a copy of it. It's not been
out in paperback, has it? No, it may not be. It's a $25 book, which puts most
people off. It's more a coffee table book than a book that people sit and read
through. But it did very well. It sold over 100,000 hardcover copies, which
amazes me, and I suppose is the reason why I'm doing a sequel. The publishers
like that. But it's not a book that people would sit and read, I think. It's a
book that people would pick up and look at for things that they have to be
particularly interested in, perhaps their hometown, perhaps a particular type of
application, such as looking at deserts or looking at the great bays and harbors
and so on. I don't think sitting down and reading it through would be a very
entertaining experience. Okay, I might keep my eye out for that in the future if
I can see it. Listen, that... In this country. Pardon me? Macmillan published it
in this country. Listen, your novel, Web Between the Worlds, the idea of a
satellite that's linked to the Earth, I wonder if anyone had gone beyond the
speculative stage and any actual plans are in effect for that. No, because the
strength of materials question is still the limiting factor. We have materials
now that are between five to ten times too weak to make the main cable. And so I
would say until material science develops and stronger materials become
available, no one will try and make it in practice. But what they will do is
they'll take little steps along the way, by which I mean they will suspend, for
example, a satellite from a very long cable so that it can sit at a lower orbit
than the natural one. So it can be close to the Earth than the natural orbit at
that speed. And people are already talking of cable experiments from the shuttle
in which they're let out 100 or 200 kilometers of cable. But of course, it's a
long way away from the whole 24-hour tethered satellite that is in the web
between the worlds. How long did it take you to write that novel? About, oh,
that's a tough question because what usually happens is the ideas ferment for a
while. But about between eight and nine months, I would say. It was about the
best estimate I could make. I'm not a scientist, of course, but the method you
had of anchoring that beanstalk where the huge hole was dug near Quito and the
thousands of millions of tons of dirt and rocks were exploded in on it. Is that
a feasible way to do that? It's about the only way, I think, in practice. You
have to hold the thing down by weight on the Earth end. In other words, what
you've got to do is to make sure there's just enough mass at the bottom sitting
there. Now, there's several ways you could propose to do that. One is to build
the satellite from orbit at synchronous altitude down to the Earth and then
anchoring it is an easier job because you can put material into it a little at a
time. You can bootstrap, if you like, and make a very small cable and gradually
build up to a larger one. I think that the technology we will have in 100 years'
time, though, is such that things we now consider hair-raising and scary and
difficult, people will take for granted. To give an analogy, I like to quote, if
you told people 100 years ago that there'd be hundreds of tons of metal up above
the cities, they'd say, well, you could never sleep at night because you'd be
afraid they'd fall on top of you all the time. But now people just curse
aircraft because of the noise. They don't actually think that there's hundreds
of tons of metal suspended up there. And we're not in constant fear of things
collapsing because we have some trust in the technology. I believe 100 or 150
years from now, things we now consider hair-raising and scary will be
commonplace, which is why I chose a more way-out method of anchoring the
beanstalk than the simplest one. I told Harry Rupert, who's a friend of Arthur
Clarke's, when we were talking about this, that as people get older, they get
more conservative. And that 30 years ago, I think Arthur Clarke would have
chosen a different way of anchoring his space elevator, but that's just
conjectural. Yeah, I was going to get to Clarke in just a few minutes. As long
as you brought him up, let me ask you the... I know the story of it, but could
you briefly relate how it happened that you had... Was it just coincidence that
both of you happened to be writing on that subject at the same time? It's not
really very surprising because the idea has been around a long time. The idea
was proposed back in 1960, and I read of it in 1960. In 1966, I read of it,
which was the first time it was published in the West. A Russian called Art
Sutanov published it in 1960, but he published it in Russian in a publication
that no one ever saw or heard of. But I remember the 1966 publication in Science
Magazine and thinking that's a neat idea and putting it off in the back of my
head and presumably several others had noticed it and thought of it at the same
time. And it's coincidence that Clarke and I should write the book so close
together. But in a sense, if the books hadn't been written so close together,
they would not both have been written. Because when somebody has written a book
on a subject like that, there's a tendency for other people not to write with
that same technological development. So once one person has done it, it's sort
of been done. The coincidence was that after I had reached the point where I'd
sent my manuscript off to Ace Books, and a friend of mine said that he'd heard
that Clarke had written this book, which was then available in galleys, in which
he had a space elevator. And when I read the book, I sent Clarke my manuscript,
and he wrote back and said he was fascinated, but he wasn't that surprised. And
when I read his book, I realized what he meant by that. What he meant was that
when you get right down to it, the basic physics dictates what the structure
must be like, and it's very natural to have your hero previously making a
bridge, a bridge builder, because this is, in a sense, a bridge from the Earth
up to orbit. We had both, in fact, chosen heroes with very similar names. That
was a coincidence. His hero was called Morgan, mine was called Merlin. And
before they built the space elevator, they had both been the world's leading
builder of bridges. But there were some other rather strange coincidences that
were not obvious from reading the books. One of them was, when I was thinking of
my principal character, I had as a model for him a 19th century English engineer
called Brunel. Well, it turned out that Clarke actually had Brunel in his book
and references to him. And that's an odd coincidence that is perhaps explained
by the fact that Clarke came from England, and so did I, and we were sensitive
to the English engineering tradition. That's the only way I can explain that.
But there were a number of coincidences. It's not too surprising that we should
write books in which the beanstalk or space elevator looks very similar, but
there are other things that are a bit more surprising than that. But as one of
my characters, it keeps on saying in a different book, the laws of probability
don't just permit coincidences, they absolutely require them. And to me, it's
not that surprising that Clarke and I should have written the same book at the
same time. Not the same book, if you follow me, but books with a similar theme.
Okay, very good. You have so many things going in that book besides the
beanstalk, you know, the goblins and Atlantis and so forth. Why did you, was
there any idea behind or any reason why you put Caliban in it? I needed, well,
for several reasons. One is I'm very interested in cephalopods, in the squid and
the octopus, because they are the most advanced invertebrate animals. And I had
known for quite a while that squids and octopuses are supposed to be very smart
creatures. So when I wanted a very difficult being to communicate with, the
obvious first thought, which many people do, is to have a computer as a
character. But I felt, since I had a water world in Atlantis, it would be more
interesting for me to create a situation in which the sea creature, Caliban,
communicates with the humans only with the help of a computer. In other words,
the computer is an essential part of the communication process, but the
relationship between the computer and Caliban is a very complex one that even
the human characters in the book, so they don't totally know what's going on. I
simply felt that was more interesting than perhaps having a computer as an
instrument. A smart computer has been done quite a lot, but I felt the computer
and cephalopod combination hadn't been done anywhere that I could see and was a
more interesting thing to write about. I was also able, doing that, to allow
Caliban to have the hatred for the principal villain of the book who is not
really Regulo, who is ostensibly the main villain, but is actually the fellow
who's working for Regulo. Oh yeah, definitely, that's morel, right? Right, yeah,
except in a sense many people would say that Regulo was the villain, but morel
to me was always the villain. Oh, that was clear to me, oh yes. Right. When you
build a story or a book around a technological idea such as the beanstalk or
maybe implants or the Matten link or form change, whatever, are you seriously
pursuing or examining that or just playing with wild ideas for the sake of the
story? It depends on the story. If I believe that the device is technologically
possible and that someday we will have it, then I try to develop the
consequences of that rather seriously and in a sense I'm attempting prediction
as opposed to writing entertainment. But on the other hand, if I don't really
believe something is likely to happen at all, then I'm writing for the fun of
it. I'm writing and don't expect to be taken seriously. I realize that that's
difficult for the reader because the author does not signal which ideas he
thinks are to be taken seriously and which ones are purely for entertainment.
But I usually have a fairly good dividing line in my own head. For example, the
idea of an implant, I believe that we will certainly have implants, not
necessarily for connections to the brain, but we will have rather smart built-in
sensors in the human body within 20 years which allow various bodily functions
to be controlled when they get out of line. The pacemaker is already an implant,
the heart pacemaker. But that's just the beginning. As we get our microcomputer
technology down to smaller, lighter, less power-demanding units, we will start
to see implants that do many other things in the human body. For instance, to
help control a finicky digestive system, to help someone sleep who has real
troubles sleeping, you need something that gets involved with the sleep
-producing signals which come from the back of the brain in an area called the
reticular formation. Things like this, I believe, we will really have within 20
years. Now, those are the introsomatic chips in My Brother's Keeper that you're
talking about. Yes, but it started before that. It started with a story called
Bounded in a Nutshell in which I had proposed that as the logical conclusion was
one in which the human brain could be hooked in to a microchip which could then
be used to communicate with other individuals having implants by radio signals.
The difference is in My Brother's Keeper that they weren't just brain
communications. They were used anywhere in the body that people felt
appropriate. But it built on an idea that was in Bounded in a Nutshell which was
a story published in Analog in 78, I suppose. Yeah, I read that one. I thought
there you were also trying to oh, I don't know, talk about the importance of the
space program that this might do, I mean, detract from it somehow. Well, it
would limit people in terms of the distance they were willing to go away from
the rest of the group because if you ever did achieve through radio
communication what would look to us with our technology like telepathy, then
people would really miss it and they would perhaps then not want to travel away
from the group. But it's an interesting question. There have always been people
who are lonely by nature and who don't like humanity. And I would assume that
there would always be such people and they would always be available to go off
and explore. It might mean that nobody else was interested in funding it though,
which was the point I was making. That humanity would turn inward at that point.
Okay, the brain operation that you describe in My Brother's Keeper, is that
within the grasp of modern science or medicine? No, not yet. And that's the only
reason that I put that book into a date which is really about 1990. The hero is
33 and he was born when Sputnik was launched, which was 57. So the reader can,
if he chooses, deduce it set in 1990. But the only reason putting it a few years
ahead was because the techniques for regrowing severed nerve tissue in humans
have not been developed. There are lots of experiments going on with that and
the lower animals such as amphibians will readily regrow a severed nerve. In
human beings, what happens is when you sever the nerve, you get what appears at
the beginning. You think it's going to regrow. It shows all the signs of putting
out a new tendril, an axon, which is going to connect the nerve cells. And then,
it doesn't complete the connection. And no one quite knows why. And in My
Brother's Keeper, I suggest that the thing that's getting in the way is a
proliferation of glial cells, which when you sever a nerve cell, do in fact grow
rapidly and appear to impede the nerve cells from reconnecting. But nobody quite
knows why. I suspect that in 10 years, people will know why. They will have
techniques to make nerve cells regenerate, and they'll have a whole new family
of methods for treating paraplegics and anyone else who has had damage to the
spinal cord, which is usually, the problem there is usually you've destroyed the
nerve cells and you're no longer getting signals through the motor system. So I
believe 10 years or less will give us that sort of advance. I got the strong
impression in that novel that you had left it open for a possible sequel since
you had Zan still alive. Well, I intentionally left it open-ended, but I doubt
if I will write a sequel. In the same way, I suppose, I left the end of Sight of
Proteus open, but I have not ever written a sequel because I always like to
write something new. I feel that it would be less interesting if I were to write
a sequel. Certainly the characters are there, but I think a sequel would
probably be more of a straight thriller and the science fiction overtones would
have almost disappeared because at that point the twin brothers are beginning to
integrate to a single personality. So I don't think I could simply write a
sequel without some radically new development within it, which is not
impossible. It's just I haven't got one in mind.
Okay, let's see. Leo was the one who was the spy or the guy who was working on
that introsomatic chip business. Is he the one that really wants to find Zan or
is it Lionel? And I wasn't quite sure why he even wanted to find her. Was it the
thrill, the danger, the fascination he had with her? What has been happening
through the book is that it begins, Lionel, although he is the one with the
consciousness, he's the one who thinks he knows who he is when they recover
consciousness, has always been the subordinate partner. His brother Leo had
always been the stronger personality, the more outgoing one and really the
dominant one. Now through the book, Lionel is gradually taking on more of his
brother's characteristics and certainly at the beginning of the book, Lionel
would never have dreamed of going off and chasing danger because it wasn't his
disposition so that by the end they have somewhat fused in personality to the
point where it's Leo who is really driving them along to go out and go after the
criminals for the same reason he had always done it, which is that there was, it
was the best fall of excitement. He got excitement from it and he said at the
end that there's really no thrill like it, which is this type of chase, but that
in a sense is Leo's personality speaking by that point. Lionel was the somewhat
quiet and retiring twin, but by the end of the book it's no longer Lionel who is
making most of the decisions. Leo has again become the dominant twin in a
psychological sense. That's the thing I had in mind. Yeah, that's the way I had
assumed myself, the way I'd read it. That book is so fast-paced and exciting, I
wondered if it seemed to me perfect for the movies. Is it too early for movie
rights or has anybody wondered about that? It's only came out last month and
nobody has said anything, but with that book I actually tried to write in a
different style than the one I usually write. I tried, I'm very fond of a man
who writes straight thrillers, a man called Dick Francis, who doesn't write
science fiction. He usually writes about horses, as a matter of fact, and he's
an English writer, and one of the things I liked about Dick Francis is he writes
an extremely fast-moving book, and I decided to see if I could write a faster
-moving book than I had written before, and that's what My Brother's Keeper was
my attempt to do it within the science fiction framework, but nobody has said
anything yet. As I said, it's only been out for a few weeks. Okay, I think of
all your stories, like I say, I'm an English teacher, I'm a medievalist, and I
study England and so forth, literature of England. I think of all your work, the
ones I'm most fascinated with are those stories about Erasmus Darwin, and I
wondered if those three stories that were published in Erasmus Magister, were
those originally published in that volume, or was there some kind of publication
in other magazines? They were published in different places, and it's an
interesting point. The first one was published as a fantasy in fantastic
stories. The second one was published in Alfred Hitchcock's Mystery Magazine,
and the third one, in time I'm talking now, in data publication, was published
in fantasy and science fiction. Now, in practice, they were, The Devil of
Malkirk was the last one written. That's the first one in Erasmus Magister, but
I wrote that last. But I was not quite sure when I was writing them whether I
was writing science fiction or fantasy or some type of historical detective, and
I finally decided it really didn't make any difference. I was trying to tell a
story about what I consider to be a very interesting real person, and I tried to
get the facts about Erasmus Darwin accurate, so that I was not doing any
distortion to his beliefs and views or life history, but I permitted myself
license when it came to the things that happened to him. So it was interesting,
it was a very interesting set of stories to write. Sort of very difficult to
write, I don't know why, perhaps because I was trying to put myself back in the
18th century framework, work. In other words, sort of the impetus for those
stories was your interest in Erasmus Darwin. Yes, I've been interested in him
for a long time. Somebody I found much more fascinating as a personality than
his grandson, Charles Darwin. Erasmus Darwin I had known about since I first
went to Cambridge because he attended the same college at Cambridge as I did,
and there were books about him in the library and so on. And so I have an early
fascination with him. And I found him especially interesting because he did so
many different things. And was a poet and a philosopher and an inventor and a
famous physician. And he's just a fascinating combination. I decided that what I
would try to do would be to have him apply his powers of observation which were
famous throughout Europe in his day. He was noted for being able to diagnose
diseases by looking at people and observing them closely. I decided that that
power of observation would serve him well if he had to solve other mysteries. He
was also a person who was strongly rationalistic. He didn't believe in
supernatural explanations. So I decided there that it would be logical for him
through his powers of observation and deduction to seek and find rational
explanations to things that everyone else in the story thought were
supernatural. Which was very reasonable. 200 years ago people were very ready to
believe supernatural answers to most things. So that was the logic behind the
stories. And I'm sort of writing another one. I think I'll just keep writing
those but rather slowly. And I tend to move around the British Isles and to set
them in different parts of England or Scotland or Wales or Ireland which I find
another interesting thing to do. But I probably won't finish that until next
spring. Yeah, the three stories that were in that volume I can understand the
background to say the first one, the Loch Ness monster one and also the one
about that race of little people who branched off from humanity but I wonder if
the Lambeth Immortal had been based on any kind of legend or local stories.
Well, there is a legend in East Anglia about a phantom black hound called Black
Shuck that appears on the roads of East Anglia which is where the story took
place and chases travelers and kills them and tears them to pieces. And of
course the villagers in the story would look on the reappearance of the Lambeth
Immortal as being very similar to this legendary hound.
but that is just a local legend. I don't know of it anywhere else in the British
Isles and it's not too central. The central element is that a disease is one of
the few things which can go on through many generations. You know, the curse
that people talk about, the witch's curse or something is not plausible if you
want to be rational about it, but the idea that certain diseases are passed on
through a family for hundreds of years is very well established. And I simply
use the fact that you can induce epilepsy by a regular pattern of lights, which
is also well known now, but was much less well known 100 or 200 years ago. Okay,
in your fiction, one thing that fascinates me is the fact that you are so very
hard to pin down. It's almost like you said a moment ago that you picked a brand
new style for My Brother's Keeper, but you also seem to blend science fiction
with other categories, too, like the detective story with Erasmus Magister and
the spy story with My Brother's Keeper and so forth. You keep moving around and
keep your readers shaking up a little. And I wonder if there was a conscious
intent behind that. It's not such a conscious intent as the fact that I like to
read all those categories of story. I read a lot of detective fiction. I read
thrillers. I read science fiction. And when I'm thinking of a story, I want to
write the type that fits. And I'm told, as you say, it may be bad in building up
a readership because readers like something predictable. If they buy a Rex Stout
book, they want it to be about Nero Wolfe, even if they've read 40 Nero Wolfe
books. And if they pick up a Conan Doyle story, even though he wrote tons of
other things, the strong preference would be for a Sherlock Holmes. And I think
that's one reason why theories in science fiction do quite well. E.C. Tubb must
have about 30 of his Dumarest series out. But I would think that they're
extremely boring to write. And as you probably know, Conan Doyle very much
wished he could have killed off Sherlock Holmes, but the readers kept saying,
give us more Sherlock Holmes stories. But I don't think that the writer gets
much pleasure from writing the same book in a stylistic sense or a thematic
sense. I would say that must be awful. And one reason why I'm somewhat glad I
don't write full-time because the pressure to produce a series I'm sure is there
much more for full-time writers. It's much easier to produce a series in one
sense because you've got the characters available and you've got the settings
available. And to the reader, those are familiar landmarks which many people
like to have. But if you're writing with any interest in the ideas of the
stories, it's very difficult to write a series because it constrains the new
things you can do. You have to do everything consistent with the previous world
that you've built up. I know they're very common, but I think they're very
common for commercial reasons that writers find they're popular with readers,
but I don't think that they're popular with writers in terms of the enjoyment of
the writing process. So I must admit I've done no polling of writers to find
that out. I'm speaking in terms of what I would like to write when I sit down
and write something. Well, I agree with that. Usually a series book, or many
times a trilogy, or even longer, a series like that, it really falls off in
quality after the original. In fact, we were talking to Brian Aldis a few months
ago, and he just deplored the tendency to capitalize on the success of the first
book by writing two more and making a trilogy. Usually the other two books are
not very good. Of course, he is writing a trilogy at the moment. I know. That's
the ironic thing, but Heliconia Spring, which I have and have not read, is
supposedly going to be not really the first book of a trilogy, but nearly the
first of three books set in a particular world. But I will see how that works
out. But I agree with him. It's a thing to deplore. And my own experience of
reading sequels, never mind trilogies, is that you don't get nearly the pleasure
that you got from the first one. I can think of Dune, for example, which to me
has become progressively less interesting after the first book, Dune itself,
Children of Dune, Dune Messiah, and God Emperor of Dune. None of them have
captured my interest. In the case of Larry Niven, I felt Ringworld engineers
just couldn't get me into it the way that Ringworld did. In the case of Gateway,
Beyond the Blue Event Horizon, wrapped things up, but I couldn't get any real
interest in what happened to them. So this is very common, as you say. Sequels
tend to go downhill from the original. And I think it's largely because all that
the sequel does is explain the mysteries left over from the first one. Those
mysteries are often part of the interest. The thoughts that you're left with
when you finish a book are important and you don't want every last knot neatly
tied. And that's why I didn't like Ringworld engineers. It explained where the
Ringworld came from, but it didn't have the impact of the original. Okay. Of all
the science fiction writers, in fact, of all the writers, contemporary writers
that I read, I can't think of one who I think has more fun writing than you do.
Would that be, I mean, do you have fun writing? I think I do. I certainly love
to sit down and write. I often don't have time to do it, but that's a different
consideration. I find that there's several things that help me. One is that I
don't have to do it, that I'm doing it as a hobby. Another is that I write lots
of non-fiction, and when I write non-fiction, I'm constrained in what I can
think. In other words, if you're writing respectable science, you somewhat have
to put yourself into an acceptable framework, and if you think outrageous
thoughts, you can't really write them down, or you have to limit yourself.
Whereas in fiction, you can think the most outrageous thoughts imaginable, and
generally speaking, the more outrageous they are, the more people like them. So
I do enjoy writing, and I like to play around. I like the fact that a story
gives you an opportunity to express an idea, or to express a point of view, and
occasionally to preach. I don't approve of people preaching at me in stories. I
find the temptation sometimes irresistible when I'm writing them.
Okay. You've answered my next two or three questions with that one. That's good.
I think you answered this a little while ago. Let me ask it to you in a
different way. Do you see yourself as an entertainer or as an informer? Largely
as an entertainer. So I will qualify that by saying I'm now writing a book, or
it's actually a series of stories which will be published as a book, and I'm
writing the final story for Jim Bain at Thor Books, in which I will have a
rather lengthy appendix in which, because the stories are all hard science
fiction with lots of science content, I'm going to explain in the appendix where
I have followed what is now accepted as real science, where I have extrapolated
it in a reasonable way, and where I have simply made things up that I don't
consider likely. And I always feel that when I was reading science fiction a
long time ago and had not got much of a scientific background, I was always
unsure in a story that used the vocabulary of science. I was always unsure
whether I was reading a description of real science or complete hocus-pocus that
someone had invented. And I couldn't draw that dividing line, and of course the
author doesn't usually draw the dividing line for you. So in this case, I
thought just for the fun of it, for the five stories, I would put in a factual
appendix in which I'd say, these stated facts about what we think black holes
are like are consistent with the best modern physics. These I had to make up
because I needed them for the story. And I don't know if readers will like that,
but it's a thing that I haven't seen done. And I suppose, coming back to your
question, it does stem somewhere from a feeling that if you're going to
entertain, you also have some responsibility to inform if you can, provided you
don't make it do so much informing that it becomes as dull as ditch water for
the reader.
Okay, Dr. Sheffey, we need to flip the tape now. I wanted to ask you first. I
don't have too many more questions, but can you give us a little more time if we
flip the tape? Yeah, no problem. Okay. Yeah, we get to the end of the tape and I
want to make sure we get it over before we get in the middle of an answer. Okay.
So David's going to flip it over right now. Just a second. Thank you. Thank you.
Let me ask you a question while you're flipping it. Okay. This is a question to
you. Do you teach any science fiction courses? Yes, sir, we do. We've taught
one, uh, we've taught one now, I've taught one now for about three years.